{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1 \deff0\deflang1031\deflangfe1031{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f2\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1{\*\panose 02070309020205020404}Courier New;}
{\f132\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f133\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f135\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f136\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}
{\f137\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f138\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f139\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f148\fmodern\fcharset238\fprq1 Courier New CE;}
{\f149\fmodern\fcharset204\fprq1 Courier New Cyr;}{\f151\fmodern\fcharset161\fprq1 Courier New Greek;}{\f152\fmodern\fcharset162\fprq1 Courier New Tur;}{\f153\fmodern\fcharset177\fprq1 Courier New (Hebrew);}
{\f154\fmodern\fcharset178\fprq1 Courier New (Arabic);}{\f155\fmodern\fcharset186\fprq1 Courier New Baltic;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1031\langfe1031\cgrid\langnp1031\langfenp1031 \snext0 Normal;}{\s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\nowidctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel0\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\b\fs36\lang2057\langfe1031\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1031 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 1;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\cs15 \additive \b \sbasedon10 Strong;}}{\info{\author Ulli}{\operator Ulli}{\creatim\yr2001\mo3\dy5\hr3\min44}
{\revtim\yr2002\mo1\dy21\hr11\min43}{\version6}{\edmins0}{\nofpages15}{\nofwords5188}{\nofchars29576}{\*\company UMG_EDV}{\nofcharsws36321}{\vern8249}}\margl1417\margr1417\margt1417\margb1134 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphhotz425\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\horzdoc\dghspace120\dgvspace120\dghorigin1701\dgvorigin1984\dghshow0\dgvshow3\jcompress\viewkind1\viewscale100\nolnhtadjtbl \fet0\sectd 
\linex0\sectdefaultcl {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang
{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \qc \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1031\langfe1031\cgrid\langnp1031\langfenp1031 {
\b\fs48\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 The F.I.D.E. Laws Of Chess
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\fs36\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 
\par Preface
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 The Laws of Chess cannot cover all possible situations that may arise during a game, nor can they regulate all administrative questions. Where cases are not precisely regulated by an Article of the Laws, it should be pos
sible to reach a correct decision by studying analogous situations which are discussed in the Laws. 
\par The Laws assume arbiters have the necessary competence, sound judgement and absolute objectivity. Too detailed a rule might deprive the arbiter of his free
dom of judgement and thus prevent him from finding the solution to a problem dictated by fairness, logic and special factors. 
\par F.I.D.E. appeals to all chess players and federations to accept this view. Any chess federation that already operates, or wants to introduce, more detailed rules is free to do so, provided: 
\par (a) 
\par }\pard \ql \li360\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin360\itap0 {\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 they do not conflict in any way with the official F.I.D.E. Laws of Chess; 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 (b) 
\par }\pard \ql \li360\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin360\itap0 {\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 they are limited to the territory of the federation in question; and 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 (c) 
\par }\pard \ql \li360\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin360\itap0 {\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 they are not valid for any F.I.D.E. match, championship, or qualifying event, or to a F.I.D.E. title or rating tournament. 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 In the Articles of these Laws, "he", "him" and "his" can refer to "she", "her" and "hers". 
\par }{\b\fs36\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 
\par Article 1: The Chessboard 
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 The game of chess is played between two opponents by moving pieces on a square board called a "chessboard". 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 1.1
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 The chessboard is composed of 64 equal squares, alternately light (the "white" squares) and dark (the "black" squares). 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 1.2
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 The chessboard is placed between the players in such a way that the near corner to the right of each player is white. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 1.3
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 The eight vertical rows of squares are called "files". 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 1.4
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 The eight horizontal rows of squares are called "ranks". 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 1.5
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 The lines of squares of the same colour, touching corner to corner, are called "diagonals". 
\par }{\b\fs36\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 
\par Article 2: The Pieces 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 2.1
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 At the beginning of the game, one player has 16 light-coloured pieces (the "white" pieces), the other has 16 dark-coloured pieces (the "black" pieces. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 2.2
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 These pieces are as follows: 
\par \page 
\par A white king: \tab \tab K \tab \tab A black king: \tab \tab k \tab 
\par A white queen: \tab Q \tab \tab A black queen: \tab q \tab 
\par Two white rooks: \tab R \tab \tab Two black rooks: \tab r \tab 
\par Two white knights: \tab N \tab \tab Two black knights: \tab n \tab 
\par Two white bishops: \tab B \tab \tab Two black bishops: \tab b \tab 
\par Eight white pawns: \tab P \tab \tab Eight black pawns: \tab p \tab 
\par \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 2.3
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 The initial position of the chessboard and the pieces on it is as follows: 
\par 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\tx0\tx959\tx1918\tx2877\tx3836\tx4795\tx5754\tx6713\tx7672\tx8631\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f2\fs20\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057       +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
\par   8   | r | n | b | q | k | b | n | r |<-- this square is "black"
\par       +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
\par   7   | p | p | p | p | p | p | p | p |
\par       +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
\par   6   |   | .}{\f2\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057  }{\f2\fs20\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 |   | . |   | . |   | . |
\par       +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
\par   5   | . |   | . |   | . |   | . |   |
\par       +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
\par   4   |   | . |   | . |   | . |   | . |
\par       +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
\par   3   | . |   | . |   | . |   | . |   |
\par       +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
\par   2   | P | P | P | P | P | P | P | P |
\par       +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
\par   1   | R | N | B | Q | K | B | N | R |<-- this square is "white"
\par       }{\f2\fs20\lang1040\langfe1031\langnp1040 +---+---+---+---+---+---+---+---+
\par     
\par         A   B   C   D   E   F   G   H
\par 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\fs36\lang1040\langfe1031\langnp1040 
\par }{\b\fs36\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 Article 3: The Right To Move 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 3.1
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 The player with the white pieces commences the game. The players alternate in making one move at a time until the game is completed. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 3.2
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 A player is said to "have the move" when his opponent's move has been completed. 
\par }{\b\fs36\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 
\par Article 4: The General Definition Of The Move 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 4.1
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 With the exception of castling (Article 5.1(b)), a move is the transfer by a player of one of his pieces from one square to another square, which is either vacant or occupied by an opponent's piece. 
\par [A capture is, therefore, merely a certain type of move.] 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 4.2
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 No piece, except the rook when castling (Article 5.1(b)) and the knight (Article 5.5), may cross a square occupied by another piece. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 \page 4.3
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 
A piece played to a square occupied by an opponent's piece captures it as part of the same move. The captured piece must be removed immediately from the chessboard by the player making the capture (see Article 5.6(c) for capturing "en passant"). 
\par }{\b\fs36\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\ql \li0\ri0\keepn\nowidctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel0\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\fs36\lang2057\langfe1031\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1031 {Article 5: The Moves Of The Pieces 
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs24\lang1031\langfe1031\cgrid\langnp1031\langfenp1031 {\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 5.1 The King:
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 (a) 
\par }\pard \ql \li360\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin360\itap0 {\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 Except when castling, the king moves to any adjoining square that is }{\ul\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 not attacked}{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 
 by an opponent's piece. An attacked square is defined as one that can be occupied by the opponent\rquote s next move.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 (b) 
\par }\pard \ql \li360\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin360\itap0 {\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 Castling is a move of the king and either rook, counting as a }{\ul\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 single move of the king}{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 
 and executed as follows: the king is transferred from its original square two squares toward either rook on the same rank; then that rook is transferred over the king to the square the king has just crossed. 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 (c) 
\par }\pard \ql \li360\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin360\itap0 {\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 If a player touches a rook and then his king, he may not castle with that rook and the situation will by governed by Articles 7.2 and 7.3 [Touched Piece rules]. 

\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 (d) 
\par }\pard \ql \li360\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin360\itap0 {\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 If a player, intending to cast
le, touches the king first, or king and rook at the same time, and it then appears that castling is illegal, the player may choose either to move his king or to castle on the other side, provided that castling on that side is legal. If the king has no leg
al move, the player is free to make any legal move. 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 (e) 
\par }\pard \ql \li360\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin360\itap0 {\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 Castling is }{\ul\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 permanently}{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057  illegal: 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 (i) 
\par }\pard \ql \li360\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin360\itap0 {\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 if the king has already been moved; or 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 (ii) 
\par }\pard \ql \li360\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin360\itap0 {\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 with a rook that has already been moved. 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 (f) 
\par }\pard \ql \li360\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin360\itap0 {\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 Castling is prevented }{\ul\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 for the time being}{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 : 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 (i) 
\par }\pard \ql \li360\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin360\itap0 {\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 if the king's original square, or the square which the king must pass over, or that which it is to occupy, is attacked by an opponent's piece; or 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 (ii) 
\par }\pard \ql \li360\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin360\itap0 {\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 if there is any piece between the king and the rook with which castling is to be effected [i.e. castling may still be lega
l even if the rook is attacked or, when castling queenside, the rook passes over an attacked square] . 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 5.2 The Queen.
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 The queen moves to any square (except as limited by Article 4.2) [No leapfrogging] on the file, rank, or diagonals on which she stands. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 5.3 The Rook.
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 The rook moves to any square (except as limited by Article 4.2) on the file or rank on which it stands. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 \page 5.4 The Bishop.
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 The bishop moves to any square (except as limited by Article 4.2) on the diagonals on which it stands. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 5.5 The Knight.
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 
The knight's move is composed of two different steps; first, it makes one step of one single square along its rank or file, and then, still moving away from the square of departure, one step of one single square on a diagonal. It does not matter if the sq
uare of the first step is occupied. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 5.6 The Pawn.
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 (a) 
\par The pawn may move only forward [except as limited by Article 4.2]. 
\par (b) 
\par Except when making a capture, it advances from its }{\ul\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 original}{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057  square either one or two vacant squares along the file on which it is placed, and on }{\ul\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 
subsequent}{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057  moves it advances one vacant square along the file. When capturing, it advances one square along either of the diagonals on which it stands. 
\par (c) 
\par A pawn, attacking a square crossed by an opponent's pawn which has [}{\ul\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 in the previous move}{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 
] been advanced two squares in one move from its original square, may capture this opponent's pawn as though the latter had been moved only one square. This capture may only be made in }{\ul\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 immediate}{
\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057  reply to such an advance, and is called an "en passant" capture. 
\par (d) 
\par On reaching the last rank, a pawn must immediately be exchanged, as part of the }{\ul\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 same move}{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 
, for either a queen, or a rook, a bishop, or a knight, of the same colour as the pawn, at the player's choice and without taking into account the ot
her pieces still remaining on the chessboard. This exchange of a pawn for another piece is called "promotion", and the effect of the promoted piece is immediate and permanent. A pawn for example which has been promoted to a queen may immediately  check th
e opposing king.
\par (e) 
\par In a competition, if a new piece required for the promotion is not immediately available, the player may stop his clock to ask for the assistance of the arbiter. The player must complete his move correctly, in the manner specified in Article 5.6(d). 

\par }{\b\fs36\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 
\par Article 6: The Completion Of The Move 
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 A move is completed: 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 6.1
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 in the case of the transfer of a piece to a vacant square, when the player's hand has released the piece; 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 6.2
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 in the case of a capture, when the captured piece has been removed from the chessboard and the player, having placed his own piece on its new square, has released this [capturing] piece from his hand; 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 6.3
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 in the case of castling, when the player's hand has released the rook on the square [previously] crossed by the k
ing. When the player has released the king from his hand, the move is not yet completed, but the player no longer has the right to make any move other than castling on that side, if this is legal; 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 \page 6.4
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 in the case of the promotion of a pawn, when the pawn
 has been removed from the chessboard and the player's hand has released the new piece after placing it on the promotion square. If the player has released from his hand the pawn that has reached the promotion square, the move is not yet completed, but th
e player no longer has the right to play the pawn to another square. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 6.5
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 When determining whether the prescribed number of moves has been made in the allotted time, the last move is not considered complete until after the player has stopped his clock. This
 applies to all situations except those governed by Articles 10.1, 10.2, 10.3, 10.4 and 10.6. [i.e. when the move has been completed in the sense of Articles 6.1-6.4, and the game ends immediately after the move in question, which may, for example, put th
e player's opponent into checkmate. This Law was introduced to prevent the situation where a player returns to the board to claim a win on time, possibly an hour after being checkmated!] . 
\par }{\b\fs36\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 
\par Article 7: The Touched Piece 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 7.1
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 Provided that he first expresses his intention (e.g. by saying "j'adoube"), the player having the move may adjust one or more pieces on their squares. 
\par [If a player's opponent is absent from the chessboard, it is best to inform one of his team-mates, or some other witness.] 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 7.2
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 Except for the above case, if the player having the move deliberately touches on the board: 
\par (a) 
\par one or more pieces of the same colour, he must move or capture the first piece he touched that can be moved or captured; or 
\par (b) 
\par one of his own pieces and one of his
 opponent's pieces, he must capture his opponent's piece with his own piece; or, if this is illegal, move or capture the first piece he touched that can be moved or captured. If it is impossible to establish which piece was touched first, the player's pie
ce shall be considered the touched piece. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 7.3
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 If none of the touched pieces has a legal move (or if none of the opponent's pieces which were touched can be captured legally), the player is free to make any legal move. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 7.4
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 If a player wishes to claim that his opponent has violated Article 7.2, he must do so before he himself touches a piece. 
\par [Note that the clause "deliberately touches" protects a player from having to move a piece accidentally touched by his elbow/wrist etc] }{\cf2\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 [Ulli: These rules have not bee
n implemented in those cases where the touched piece could move to a number squares; if the touched piece has only one move then it will be moved immediately since the intention of the player is obvious]}{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 
\par }{\b\fs36\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 
\par }{\b\fs36\lang1036\langfe1031\langnp1036 Article 8: Illegal Positions 
\par }{\b\lang1036\langfe1031\langnp1036 8.1
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 If, during a game
, it is found that an illegal move was made, the position shall be reinstated to what it was before the illegal move was made. The game shall then continue by applying the rules of Article 7 to the move replacing the illegal move. If the position cannot b
e reinstated, the game shall be annulled and a new game played. This applies to all sessions of play, and to a game awaiting a decision by adjudication. 
\par [Note that this discovery of an illegal move must be made while the game is still in progress, before r
esignation or the agreement of a draw. The only possible exception can be if the illegal move itself would theoretically end the game: anyone trying the trick 1. e2-e4 e7-e5; 2. Bf1-c4 Ng8-f6; 3. Qd1xf7 "mate" may be penalised under Article 10.17! Note th
at the act of playing an illegal move, at ANY stage of the game, does not IN ITSELF forfeit the game.] 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 8.2
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 If, during a game, one or more pieces have been accidentally displaced and incorrectly replaced, the position before the displacement occurred shall 
be reinstated, and the game shall continue. If the position cannot be reinstated, the game shall be annulled and a new game played. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 8.3
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 If a player moves and in the course of this inadvertently knocks over a piece, or several pieces, he must re-establish the position in his own time. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 8.4
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 If, after an adjournment, the position is incorrectly set up, the position as it was on adjournment must be set up again and the game continued. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 8.5
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 If, during a game, it is found that the initial position of the pieces was incorrect, the game shall be annulled and a new game played. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 8.6
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 If a game has begun with colours incorrectly reversed, then it shall continue if more than one quarter of the time allocated to both players to the first time control has elapsed. Earlie
r, the arbiter can arrange for a new game to start with the correct colours, if the event's timetable is not excessively disrupted. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 8.7
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 If, during a game, it is found that the board has been placed contrary to Article 1.2, the position reached should be transferred to a correctly-placed board, and the game continued. 
\par [In the situations covered by Articles 8.5-8.7, a spectator is justified in pointing out to the arbiter the error he has noticed. In Article 8.7, the implicit assumption is that the relative positions of the pieces relative to one another were correct] . 

\par }{\b\fs36\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 
\par Article 9: Check 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 9.1
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 The king is in "check" when the square it occupies is attacked by one or more of the opponent's pieces; in this case, the latter is/are said to be "checking" the king. 
A player may not make a move which leaves his king on a square attacked by any of his opponent's pieces. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 9.2
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 Check must be parried by the move immediately following. If any check cannot be parried, the king is said to be "checkmated" ("mated"). 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 9.3
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 Declaring a check is not obligatory. 
\par [Merely polite! Playing an illegal move does not imply the loss of the game: see Article 8.1.] 
\par }{\b\fs36\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 
\par \page Article 10: The Completed Game 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 10.1
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 The game is won by the player who has checkmated his opponent's king. This immediately ends the game. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 10.2
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 The game is won by the player whose opponent declares he resigns. This immediately ends the game. 
\par }{\cf2\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 [Ulli: The program may decide to resign; the human opponent cannot resign \endash  he simply starts a new game.]}{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 10.3
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 The game is a draw when the king of the player who has the move is not in check, and this player cannot make any legal move. The player's king is then said to be "stalemated". This immediately ends the game.  
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 10.4
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 The game is drawn when one of the following endings arises: 
\par (a) 
\par king against king; 
\par (b) 
\par king against king with only bishop or knight; 
\par (c) 
\par king and bishop against king and bishop, with both bishops on diagonals of the same colour. 
\par This immediately ends the game. 
\par }{\cf2\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 [Ulli: Draw on lack of material is not yet implementd]}{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 10.5
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 A player having a lone king cannot win the game. A draw shall be declared however if the }{\ul\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 opponent}{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 
 of a player with a lone king oversteps the time limit (Articles 10.13 and 10.14) or seals an illegal move (Articles 10.16).  
\par }{\cf2\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 [Ulli: Loss on time is not implementd]}{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 
\par 10.6
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 The game is drawn upon agreement between the two players. This immediately ends the game. 
\par }{\cf2\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 [Ulli: This rule may be implemented in a later version of the program]}{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057  
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 10.7
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 A proposal of a draw under the provisions of Article 10.6 may be made by a player only at the moment when he has just moved a
 piece. On then proposing a draw, he starts the clock of his opponent. The latter may accept the proposal, which is always to be taken as unconditional, or he may reject it either orally or by completing a move. A draw offer is valid until the opponent ha
s accepted or rejected it. 
\par [The gamesmanship question "Are you playing for a win?" can be considered as an offer of a draw] . 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 10.8
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 If a player proposes a draw while his opponent's clock is running and his opponent is contemplating his move, the opponent m
ay still agree to the draw or reject the offer. A player who offers a draw in this manner may be penalised by the arbiter. 
\par }{\cf2\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 [Ulli: Draw offers are not implemented]}{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 10.9
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 If a player proposes a draw while his own clock is running or after his move has been sealed, the opponent may postpone his decision until after he has seen the first player's move. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 \page 10.10
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 The game is drawn, upon a claim by the player having the move, when the same position, for the third time: 
\par (a) 
\par is about to appear, if he first writes the move on his scoresheet and declares to the arbiter his intention of making this move; or 
\par (b) 
\par has just appeared, the same player having the move each time. 
\par The position is considered the same if pieces of the same kind and colour occupy the same squares, and if all the possible moves of all the pieces are the same, including the rights to castle [at some future time] or to capture a pawn "en passant".
\par }{\cf2\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 [Ulli: This rule is not implemented.]}{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057  
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 10.11
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 If a player executes a move without having claimed a draw
 for one of the reasons stated in Article 10.10, he loses the right to claim a draw. This right is restored to him, however, if the same position [later] appears again, the same player having the move. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 10.12
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 The game is drawn when a player having the move
 claims a draw and demonstrates that at least [the last?] 50 consecutive moves have been made by each side without the capture of any piece and without the movement of any pawn. }{\cf2\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 [Ulli: This rule is not implemented.]}{
\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057  This number of 50 moves can be increased for certain positions, provided that this increase in number and these positions have been clearly announced by the organisers before the event starts. 
\par [The claim then proceeds according to 10.13. The most extreme case yet known of a position which might take more than 50 moves to win is king, rook and bishop against king and two knights, which can run for 223 moves between captures!] 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 10.13
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 If a player claims a draw under the provisions of Articles 10.10 and/or 10.12, the arbiter must first stop the cloc
ks while the claim is being investigated. In the absence of the arbiter, a player may stop both clocks to seek the arbiter's assistance. 
\par (a) 
\par If the claim is found to be correct, the game is drawn. 
\par (b) 
\par If the claim is found to be incorrect, the arbiter 
shall then add five minutes to the claimant's used time. If this means that the claimant has [now] overstepped the time limit, his game will be declared lost. Otherwise, the game will be continued, and a player who has indicated a move according to Articl
e 10.10(a) is obliged to execute this move on the chessboard. 
\par (c) 
\par A player who has made a claim under these Articles cannot withdraw the claim. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 10.14
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 The game is lost by a player who has not completed the prescribed number of moves in the allotted time, unless his opponent has only the king remaining, in which case the game is drawn. (See Articles 6.5 and 10.5.) 

\par [Situations when Articles 10.1-10.4 or 10.6 apply are the only other exceptions.] 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 10.15
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 The game is lost by a player who arrives at the chessbo
ard more than one hour late, for the beginning of the game or for the resumption of an adjourned game. The time of delay is counted from the [scheduled] start of the playing session. However, in the case of an adjourned game, if the player who made the se
aled move is the late player, the game is decided otherwise if: 
\par (a) 
\par the absent player has won the game by virtue of the fact that the sealed move is checkmate; or 
\par (b) 
\par the absent player has produced a drawn game by virtue of the fact that the sealed move is stalemate, or if one of the positions in Article 10.4 has arisen as a consequence of the sealed move; or 
\par (c) 
\par the player present at the chessboard has lost the game according to Article 10.14 by exceeding his time limit. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 10.16
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 At the resumption, the game is lost by a player whose recording of his sealed move: 
\par (a) 
\par is ambiguous; or 
\par (b) 
\par would result in a false move the true significance of which is impossible to establish; or 
\par (c) 
\par would result in an illegal move. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 10.17
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 The game is lost by a player 
who, during the game, refuses to comply with the Laws. If both players refuse to comply with the Laws, or if both players arrive at the chessboard more than one hour late, the game shall be declared lost by both players. 
\par }{\b\fs36\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 
\par Article 11: The Recording Of Games 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 11.1
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 
In the course of play, each player is required to record the game (his own moves and those of his opponent), move after move, as clearly and legibly as possible in the Algebraic Notation, on the scoresheet prescribed for the competition. It is irre
levant whether the player first makes his move and then records it, or vice versa. 
\par [The use of Descriptive Notation or foreign versions of Algebraic Notation is tolerated in internal tournaments, e.g. weekend congresses.] 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 11.2
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 If a player has less than f
ive minutes on his clock until the time control, he is not obliged to meet the requirements of Article 11.1. As soon as the special device (e.g. the flag) on the clock indicates the end of his allotted time, the player must immediately complete his record
 of the game by filling in the moves omitted from his scoresheet. 
\par [A player may be justified in restarting his opponent's clock, without having to make a move, if his opponent has more than 5 minutes left and is not fulfilling the requirements of Article 1
1.1. A player cannot stop his clock unless he has recorded at least his opponent's last move and all previous moves of the game.] 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 11.3
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 If both players cannot keep score, the arbiter, or his deputy, must endeavour to be present and keep score. The arbiter 
must not intervene unless one flag falls, and until then he should not indicate in any manner to the players how many moves have been made. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 11.4
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 If Article 11.2 does not apply, and a player refuses to record the game according to Article 11.1, then Article 10.17 should be applied. [Failure to comply with the Laws of Chess]. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 \page 11.5
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 If a player does not refuse to comply with the arbiter's request for a completed scoresheet, but declares that he cannot complete his scoresheet without consulting his opponent's
, the request for this scoresheet must be made to the arbiter, who will determine whether the scoresheet can be completed before the time-control without inconveniencing the other player. The latter cannot refuse his scoresheet, because the scoresheet bel
ongs to the organisers and the reconstruction will be made in his opponent's time. In all other cases, the scoresheets can be completed only after the time-control. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 11.6
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 If, after the time-control, one player alone has to complete his scoresheet, he will do so before making another move, and with his clock running if his opponent has moved. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 11.7
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 If, after the time-control, both players need to complete their scoresheets, both clocks will be stopped until the two scoresheets are completed, if necessary with
 the help of the arbiter's scoresheet and/or a chessboard under the control of the arbiter, who should have recorded the actual game position beforehand. 
\par [In case this position gets disturbed!] 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 11.8
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 If, in Article 11.6, the arbiter sees that the scoresheets alone cannot help in the reconstruction of the game, he will act as in Article 11.7. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 11.9
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 If it proves impossible to reconstruct the moves as prescribed under Article 11.7, the game shall continue. In this case, the next move played will be considered to be the first one of the following time-control.
\par }{\cf2\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 [Ulli: Move recording may be implemented in a later version of the program]}{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057  
\par }{\b\fs36\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 
\par Article 12: The Chess Clock
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 12.1
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 Each player must make a certain number of moves in an allotted period of time, these two fact
ors being specified in advance. The time saved by a player during one period is added to his time available for the next period. }{\cf2\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 
[Ulli: Normal tournament allotted time period is two hours each player for 40 moves, giving an average thinking time of }{\b\cf2\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 three minutes per move}{\cf2\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 .]}{
\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 12.2
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 
Control of each player's time is effected by means of a clock equipped with a flag (or other special device) for this purpose. The flag is considered to have fallen when the arbiter observes the fact, or when the arbiter determines t
hat the allotted time has been exceeded, even though the flag, because of a defect, has not fallen when the end of the minute hand has passed the end of the flag. In cases where no arbiter is present, the flag is considered to have fallen when a claim to 
that effect has been made by a player. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 12.3
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 At the time determined for the start of the game, the clock of the player who has the white pieces is started. During the game, each of the players, having completed his move, stops his own clock and starts his o
pponent's clock. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 12.4
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 
Every indication given by a clock is considered to be conclusive in the absence of evident defects. A player who wishes to claim any such defect must do so as soon as he himself has become aware of it, but not later than immediately 
after his flag has fallen at the time-control. A clock with an obvious defect should be replaced, and the time used by each player up to the time the game was interrupted should be indicated on the new clock as accurately as possible. The arbiter shall us
e
 his best judgment in determining what times shall be shown on the new clock. If the arbiter decides to add time used to the clock of one or both of the players, he shall under no circumstances (except as provided for in Article 10.13(b)) leave a player w
ith: 
\par (a) 
\par less than five minutes to the time-control; or 
\par (b) 
\par less than one minute for every move to the time-control. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 12.5
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 If the game needs to be interrupted for some reason which requires action by the arbiter, the clocks shall be stopped by the arbit
er. This should be done, for example, in the case of an illegal position being corrected, in the case of a defective clock being changed, or if the piece which a player has declared he wishes to exchange for a promoted pawn is not immediately available, o
r to claim a draw by repetitions of position or under the 50 moves rule. If the arbiter is not present, a player may stop both clocks in order to seek the arbiter's assistance. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 12.6
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 In the case of Articles 8.1 and 8.2 [Illegal Positions], when it is not po
ssible to determine the exact time used by each player up to the moment when the irregularity occurred, each player shall be allotted up to that moment a time proportional to that indicated by the clock when the irregularity was ascertained. For example, 
a
fter Black's 30th move it is found that an irregularity took place at the 20th move. For these 30 moves, the clock shows 90 minutes for White and 60 minutes for Black, so it is assumed that the times used by the two players for the first 20 moves were as 
follows: 
\par for White: 90 x 20/30 = 60 minutes
\par for Black: 60 x 20/30 = 40 minutes 
\par This rule must not be used to leave a player with less than five minutes to the time control, or less than one minute for every move to the time control. (The most common occas
ion when this problem arises is immediately after an adjournment, when the clock times can be most easily adjusted using the times on the sealed move envelope.) 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 12.7
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 A resignation or an agreement to draw (Articles 10.2 and 10.4) remains valid even if it is found later that a flag had fallen. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 12.8
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 If both flags have fallen at virtually the same time [or if both have fallen before a claim is made by either player] and the arbiter is unable to establish clearly which flag fell first, the game shall continue.
 In this case, if the scoresheets cannot be brought up to date showing that the time control has been passed, the next move played will be considered to be the first one of the following time-control. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 12.9
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 The arbiter [and everyone else, for that matter] 
shall refrain from calling a player's attention to the fact that his opponent has made a move or that the player has forgotten to stop his clock after he has made a move, or informing the player how many moves he has made, etc. 
\par }{\cf2\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 [Ulli: Loss on time has not been implemented]}{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 
\par }{\b\fs36\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 
\par Article 13: The Adjournment Of The Game 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 \page 13.1
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 (a) 
\par If a game is not finished at the end of the time prescribed for play, the player having the move must write his move in unambiguous notation on his scoresheet, put his scoresheet and t
hat of his opponent in an envelope, seal the envelope, and only then stop his clock without starting his opponent's clock. Until he has stopped the clocks, the player retains the right to change his sealed move. If, after being told by the arbiter to seal
 his move, the player makes a move on the chessboard, he must write that same move on his scoresheet as his sealed move. 
\par (b) 
\par A player having the move who adjourns the game before the end of the playing session will have added to the used time on his clock the whole of the remaining time to the end of the session. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 13.2
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 Upon the envelope shall be indicated: 
\par (a) 
\par the names of the players; 
\par (b) 
\par the position immediately before the sealed move; 
\par (c) 
\par the time used by each player; 
\par (d) 
\par the name of the player who has sealed the move; and 
\par (e) 
\par the number of the sealed move. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 13.3
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 The arbiter is responsible for the safekeeping of the envelope and should check the accuracy of the information on it. 
\par }{\cf2\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 [Ulli: These rules may be implemented in a later version of the program]}{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057  
\par }{\b\fs36\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 
\par Article 14: The Resumption of the Adjourned Game 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 14.1
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 When the game is resumed, the position immediately before the sealed move shall be set up on the chessboard, and the time used by each player when the game was adjourned shall be indicated on the clocks. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 14.2
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 The envelope shall be opened only when the player who must reply to the sealed move is present. This player's clock shall be started after the sealed move has been made on the chessboard. 
\par (a) 
\par If two players have agreed to a draw and announce their decision to the arbiter; or 
\par (b) 
\par if one of the players in an adjourned game notifies the arbiter that he resigns and it is found, when the envelope has been opened, that the sealed move is invalid according to Article 10.16, then in (a) the 
draw stands and in (b) the resignation is still valid. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 14.3
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 If the player having to respond to the sealed move is absent, his clock shall be started but the envelope containing the sealed move shall be opened only when he arrives. The player's clock shall
 then be stopped and restarted after the sealed move has been played on the chessboard. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 \page 14.4
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 If the player who has sealed the move is absent, the player having the move is not obliged to reply to the sealed move on the chessboard. He has the right to rec
ord his move in reply on his scoresheet, to seal the scoresheet in an envelope, to stop his clock and start his opponent's clock. The envelope should then be put into safekeeping and opened on the opponent's arrival. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 14.5
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 If the envelope containing the move recorded in accordance with Article 13 has disappeared: 
\par (a) 
\par the game shall be resumed from the position at the time of adjournment and with the clock times recorded at the time of adjournment; 
\par (b) 
\par if it is impossible to re-establish the position, the game is annulled and a new game must be played; 
\par (c) 
\par if the time used at the time of the adjournment cannot be re-established, this question is decided by the arbiter. The player who sealed the move makes it on the board. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 14.6
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 If, upon resumption of th
e game, the time used has been incorrectly indicated on either clock, and if either player points this out before making his first move, the error must be corrected. If the error is not so established, the game continues without correction, unless the arb
iter feels that the consequences will be too severe. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 14.7
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 The duration of each resumption session shall be controlled by the wall clock, with the starting time and the finishing time announced in advance. 
\par }{\cf2\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 [Ulli: These rules may be implemented in a later version of the program]}{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057  
\par }{\b\fs36\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 
\par Article 15: The Conduct Of The Players 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 15.1 Prohibitions:
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 (a) 
\par During play, the players are forbidden to make use of hand-written, printed or otherwise recorded matter, or to analyse the game on another chessboard. They are also forbidden to have recourse to the advice of a third party, whether solicited or not. 

\par [The only possible exception is that a player in a team competition may be allowed to ask his captain "Should I accept his offer of a draw?" or "Does the team need me to p
lay for a win?". The captain or acting-captain must limit his reply to an immediate "Yes", "No", or "It's up to you", without supplying his answer after a detailed analysis of the position, and without making his answer emphatic in any way. This captain, 
like all his players, is not allowed to receive opinions, from any source, on the states of play of any games still in progress] . 
\par (b) 
\par The use of notes made during the game as an aid to memory is also forbidden, aside from the actual recording of the moves and the times on the clocks. 
\par (c) 
\par No analysis is permitted in the playing rooms during play or during resumption sessions. 
\par (d) 
\par It is forbidden to distract or annoy the opponent in any manner whatsoever. This includes the persistent offering of a draw. 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 \page 15.2
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 Infractions of the rules indicated in Article 15.1 may incur penalties even to the extent of the loss of the game (see Article 16.5). 
\par }{\cf2\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 [Ulli: The program does not care how you behave *grin*]}{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057  
\par }{\b\fs36\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 
\par Article 16: The Arbiter 
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 An arbiter should be designated to control the competition. His duties are: 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 16.1
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 to see that the Laws are strictly observed; 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 16.2
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 to supervise the progress of the competition, to establish that the prescribed time-limit has not been exceeded by the players, to arrange the order of re
sumption of play of adjourned games, to see that the arrangements contained in Article 13 are observed (i.e. to see that the information on the envelope is correct), to keep the sealed-move envelope until the resumption of the adjourned game, etc; 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 16.3
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 to enforce the decisions he may make in disputes that have arisen during the course of the competition; 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 16.4
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 to act in the best interests of the competition to ensure that a good playing environment is maintained and that the players are not disturbed by each other or by the audience; 
\par }{\b\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 16.5
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 to impose penalties on the players for any fault or infraction of the Laws. These penalties may include a warning, a time penalty (by adding to the player's used time or to his opponent's unused time) or even the loss of 
the game. 
\par }{\cf2\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 [Ulli: There is no arbiter; the program itself checks on rule observation]}{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057  
\par }{\b\fs36\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 
\par Article 17: Scoring 
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 For a won game, the winner gets 1 (one) point and the loser 0 (zero). For a draw, each player gets 1/2 (half) a point. 
\par }{\b\fs36\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 
\par Article 18: The Interpretation of the Laws 
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 
In case of doubts as to the application or interpretation of the Laws, F.I.D.E. will examine the evidence and render official decisions. Rulings published are binding on all affiliated federations. All proposals and questions about interp
retations should be submitted by member federations, with complete data. 
\par }{\b\fs36\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 
\par Article 19: Validity 
\par }{\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 This English text is slightly modified from the authentic version of the Laws of chess, as adopted by the 1984 F.I.D.E. Congress, and subsequently amended by t
he 1988 and 1992 F.I.D.E. Congresses. These Laws took effect from 1 January 1993. 
\par 
\par Formatting to html has been done by Hans Bodlaender, from the version, put on the Internet by Steve Rix. This formatting may have destroyed the officiality of the document,
 i.e., this document may no longer be the ultimate reference for the official rules (but it approximates it most closely.) Note also that this is not the most recent version of the FIDE-Laws. 
\par 
\par Last modified: February 11, 1998. 
\par }{\fs20\lang2057\langfe1031\langnp2057 
\par }}